---
layout: post
title: "Leveraging systemd cgroup integration to provide SLAs on Fedora 18 & 19"
date: 2013-06-14 10:00
comments: true
sharing: true
footer: true
categories: [computing, condor, HTCondor, grid computing, MRG Grid, Red Hat, Hadoop]
---

##Background##
In the not-so-distant past, enterprise data centers would create silos for specific 
services to gaurentee some metric of performance, or "Service Level Agreement" (SLA).  However,
this approach can be costly to create and maintain.

Enter the modern era of cloud computing, and one might wonder, "Why not just put it in VM?".  For 
some use cases this might work just fine, because the metrics are "good-enough".   Despite this flexibility, 
there are many cases where this approach simply won't meet some measure of performance.  I won't elaborate 
on the details, but it doesn't take Schrödinger math to figure this out, because sometimes the cat 
is dead even before you peak into the box. ;-) 

Thus, in this post we will explore leveraging systemd cgroup integration to provide SLAs on Fedora. 

--- 

##References##

*   [Definition SLA](http://searchitchannel.techtarget.com/definition/service-level-agreement)
*   [Redhat Cgroup Documentation](https://access.redhat.com/site/documentation/en-US/Red_Hat_Enterprise_Linux/6/html/Resource_Management_Guide/)
*   [Resource Management with Systemd](http://0pointer.de/blog/projects/resources.html)
*   [Systemd Service Directives](http://0pointer.de/public/systemd-man/systemd.directives.html)

---

##Prerequisites##

*   Fedora 18 or 19 box(es).
*   Make certain you've read the references, as I may gloss over some details in this post.

---

##Getting Started##
First you will need to choose a service which has been integrated with systemd that you can plan on tuning.
In this example I will use 'condor', but you could use any service that you desire.

     sudo yum install condor

**NOTE:** You could do this with raw cgroups, but it becomes difficult to gaurentee performance unless 
every service is in a group.  So systemd does a lot of the heavy lifting for us. 

Next you will need to determine the metrics of performance that you want to provide for that service.  For the 
purposes of simplicity, lets say we want to carve off 50% of the CPU for condor.  You can 
also play with disk-io-bandwidth and network settings too, but I think I will leave that for another post
as this can be complicated enough.

In order to divide up your machine you will first need to determine the existing 
shares on your machine.  This can be done by dumping the current cgroup settings to a file which 
can then be analyzed to determine the new settings. 

    cgsnapshot -s > cgroup_snap.conf 

If you have a fairly basic setup you will notice the following pattern 

    # Configuration file generated by cgsnapshot
    mount {
        cpuset = /sys/fs/cgroup/cpuset;
        cpu = /sys/fs/cgroup/cpu,cpuacct;
        cpuacct = /sys/fs/cgroup/cpu,cpuacct;
        memory = /sys/fs/cgroup/memory;
        devices = /sys/fs/cgroup/devices;
        freezer = /sys/fs/cgroup/freezer;
        net_cls = /sys/fs/cgroup/net_cls;
        blkio = /sys/fs/cgroup/blkio;
        perf_event = /sys/fs/cgroup/perf_event;
    }

    group system {
        cpu {
                cpu.rt_period_us="1000000";
                cpu.rt_runtime_us="0";
                cpu.cfs_period_us="100000";
                cpu.cfs_quota_us="-1";
                cpu.shares="1024";
        }
        cpuacct {
                cpuacct.usage="147354515620554";
        }
    }

    group system/condor.service {
        cpu {
                cpu.rt_period_us="1000000";
                cpu.rt_runtime_us="0";
                cpu.cfs_period_us="100000";
                cpu.cfs_quota_us="-1";
                cpu.shares="1024";
        }
        cpuacct {
                cpuacct.usage="146844720798260";
        }
    }
    
    ... * services look ~= 


---
    
##Analyzing your Configuration##
One thing you will notice is that systemd creates an implied hierarchy on your 
machine by default, where each service has an equal amount of cpu.shares.  This means 
when all services are contending for resources, each "service" gets an equal
share. 

Lets elaborate on shares a bit.  Say you had two service S(a) = 1, and S(b) = 3 and each service 
has multiple processes all contending for CPU. 

    %CPU = service.cpu.share /(sum (service shares @ level)) 
    %CPU[S(a)] = 1/4 = 25% 
    %CPU[S(b)] = 3/4 = 75% 

So now lets extend this idea and create a simple hierarchy
where there are two groups, with each group having two services:

                Share   Overall%
    Group 1     1       25%
        S(a)        1       12.5%
        S(b)        1       12.5%
    Group 2     3       75%
        S(c)        3       56.25%
        S(d)        1       18.75%

Hopefully this should be intuitive, however it can quickly goto plaid. Therefore, it's 
important to have a handle on how many services you have planed for a given machine, and
your intended hierarchy.  Thus the cost of reliable performance is extra complexity, which 
isn't so bad provided you've done your math.

---
    
##Altering your Configuration## 
So now lets provision condor such that it has 50% of the CPU.  First we need to get a count
of number of services that exist on the machine. 

    $ cgsnapshot -s | grep [.]service | wc -l
    30

As you can see from the previous example, and from the documentation, the default cpu.shares 
given to a service is 1024.  Thus if we want 50% CPU:

    .50 = condor.cpu.shares/(1024*29 + condor.cpu.shares)
    512*(29) + .50*condor.cpu.shares = condor.cpu.shares
    14848 = (1-.50)*condor.cpu.shares 
    condor.cpu.shares = 14848/.50 = 29696

Seem nutty? GOOD! Don't do it this way!  Instead lets use the idea of promoting a top level
group:

    vim /usr/lib/systemd/system/condor.service
    
    [Service]
    ControlGroup=cpu:/condor
    CPUShares=1024
    
Once we exit we will need to restart the daemon and verify it worked.
    
    systemctl daemon-reload
    systemctl restart condor.service
    
You may need to remove any legacy cruft from cgroups, or reboot, but you can compare the two configuration files.

    cgsnapshot -s > cgroup_snap_2.conf
    
Next you will want to submit a whole bunch of condor jobs, and try to load down the other services. 
To verify that your machine is behaving as expected you can run: 

    systemd-cgtop
    
In this example it can be difficult when you have 30 services to accurately test that you are 
guaranteed 50% so I would recommend that the reader promote a couple of services to the top level
and have them compete in a controlled experiment.
    
---

##In Summary##
Systemd's integration with cgroups is a many splendid thing, and when used correctly can
give administrators and developers another tool in which to help create SLAs in their datacenter.


